### **CHAPTER 1.4: HARDWARE ORGANIZATION OF A SYSTEM**

**CHAPTER 1.4: PROCESSORS READ AND INTERPRET INSTRUCTIONS STORED IN MEMORY** At this point, the hello.c source program has been translated by the compilation system into an executable object file called hello that is stored on the disk. To run the executable file on the unix system, we type its name into an application program called shell: `linux> ./hello` `hello, world` `linux>` The shell essentially is a C program that acts as a command line interpreter that translates human-readable printed commands into system calls required by the operating system kernel to manage file systems and execute binaries. It has no special hardware privileges, it sits entirely on the OS. It reads standard input, convert to tokens and identifies whether the command is built-in or an external binary file. If it is not a built-in command, then the shell assumes that it is the name of an executable file that needs to be loaded to memory and run. So in this case, the shell runs the hello program and then waits for it to terminate. The hello program prints its message to the screen, terminates, the shell then prints a prompt and waits for the next input command line.

CPU: Central Processing Unit, ALU: Arithmetic Logic Unit, PC: Program Counter, USB: Universal Serial Bus. To understand what happens to our hello program when we run it, we need to understand the hardware organization of a typical system. You shouldn't worry about the complex image for now, we'd understand as time moves on.

- **Buses:** Running throughout the system is a collection of electrical conduits called Buses that carry bytes of information back and forth between the components. Buses are typically designed to transfer fixed size chunks of bytes known as Words. The number of bytes in a word (Word Size) is a fundamental system parameter that varies across systems. Most systems either use word size of 4 bytes or 8 bytes.
    
- **I/O Devices:** These are the system's connection to the external world, e.g. keyboards, mouse, disk drive, etc. The Note: you might ask why do we need to connect the I/O bus to the I/O Bridge, before - why can't we just connect peripheral devices to the I/O bus then directly to the CPU. It all boils down to three things:
    

**1. THE PHYSICS OF WIRES (ELECTRICAL CAPACITANCE)** I personally hate electricity (you might find that weird cause you why would a CS guy hate electricity, but I've tried and it is what it is, tough). So I told gemini to explain this to me without using all the nerdy electricity jargons. So we're looking at a physical analogy: WATER PRESSURE. Imagine the CPU is a person holding a heavy-duty water valve, trying to send a Morse code message (1s and 0s) to the other side of the room.

- Sending a 1: Ripping the valve open to blast high pressure water.
    
- Sending a 0: Slamming the valve shut.
    

**SCENARIO A: THE DIRECT CPU-TO-MEMORY BUS** The CPU connects to the Main memory using a very, short, rigid, titanium pipe. When the CPU snaps the valve open, the water reaches the other side instantly. Because the pipe is short and rigid, the CPU can open the pipe and close billions of times per second and the exact pulse of water will be felt perfectly on the other side.

**SCENARIO B: CONNECTING EVERYTHING TO ONE PIPE** Now, imagine we take that same valve, but instead of a short rigid pipe, we connect it to a massive rubber hose. And attach to the sides of this hose are huge, empty water balloons (these are the drives, network cards, etc.) THE CRASH: The CPU tries to send a 1 - it snaps the valve open, But the water doesn't blast to the other side, instead the water gets absorbed (THE SPONGE EFFECT) it takes time for all the balloons to get filled and for the water to reach the other end. The fatal flaw: The CPU runs at high speeds, it opens the valve and closes it at fractions of nanoseconds, so when the CPU opens the valve, the balloons don't get filled and the device at the other end.

**THE PURPOSE OF THE I/O BRIDGE:** Because the CPU is so insanely fast, it cannot physically connect push signals down a pipe that has a lot of "balloons" attached to it. So the I/O Bridge came about. So the I/O Bridge stays right next to the CPU, connected to the pipe.

1. The CPU blasts its high speed Morse code to the I/O Bridge.
    
2. The I/O Bridge records the message.
    
3. The I/O Bridge then opens a pipe to transmit the data to the other components.
    

**2. THE CLOCK SPEED CRASH** Hardware operates on clock cycles. The CPU operates at a faster rate than the a keyboard, if they shared the same system clock cycle then the CPU would have to slow down to internal clock for the keyboard, Very inefficient, so what the I/O Bridge does is that, it collects the signal from the keyboard, the CPU doesn't have to wait for the keyboard, the I/O Bridge only interrupts the CPU when the keyboard has gotten what it is ready to fire a signal. -> THIS IS WHAT IS KNOWN AS INTERRUPTS PROTOCOL.

**3. THE BABEL PROBLEM (PROTOCOL TRANSLATION)** The CPU is designed to do exactly one thing: execute instructions and compute math. It speaks very specific electrical protocol. But I/O devices speak a bunch of different languages: USB, SATA, PCIe, Ethernet. If they were wired directly to the CPU, you would need specialized decoders, so all the translation logic stays inside the I/O BRIDGE.

So essentially the CPU blasts out information to the I/O Bridge which then distributes it to other components, meaning these components have to figure shit out on their own. And is specifically why parts of these components that help them figure shit out are on their own: CONTROLLERS & ADAPTERS. The distinction between these two is only matter of packaging. Controllers are chips sets in the device itself or on the system's main printed circuit board (Motherboard) while Adapters are cards (which contain the I/O Device, the mini brain and everything else the device needs) that plugs into a slot on the mother board. Regardless the purpose of each is to transfer information back and forth between the I/O Bus and an I/O Device.

One question that arised while I was reading this is that: If the RAM is also connected to the I/O Bridge, why then is the RAM faster than other devices, the reason is that the I/O Bridge actually contains two things: NORTHBRIDGE AND SOUTHBRIDGE. The Northbridge is responsible for high speed devices. RAM and GPU. While the southbound southbridge is responsible for the other I/O devices. So when the CPU needs the RAM, it essentially talks to it using the northbridge, but for other I/O devices, information has to pass through the Northbridge before the CPU and then back through the northbridge to the Southbridge then to the I/O device.

Note: The workflow described above is the classical model. In more modern architecture, the CPU connects to these things directly. RAM: Direct from the CPU's internal memory controller, cause in modern systems, the Northbridge has been ripped off entirely from the I/O bridge and placed inside the CPU. The RAM is the CPU's primary workbench so it needs the lowest possible latency -> Memory Bus. GPU (PCIe EXPANSION SLOTS): Direct from the CPU to expansion slots, this connection is specifically designed for NVMe SSD, GRAPHICS CARD. A modern GPU calculates crazy amounts of data per seconds, it cannot route data through the slow PCH (Platform Controller Hub). PCH (PLATFORM CONTROLLER HUB -> SOUTHBRIDGE): Direct from the CPU to the PCH chipset sink via Intel's Direct Media Interface or AMD's infinity Fabric. The PCH manages every other thing.

Another question that arised: WHEN THE PLATFORM CONTROLLER HUB OR THE SOUTHBRIDGE PACKAGES THE DATA OF A KEYBOARD, DOES IT SEND IT ALL AT ONCE OR ONE BY ONE? To answer this, hardware architects have to choose between two different strategies depending on the device: Low Latency vs. High Throughput.

- **KEYBOARD STRATEGY (LOW LATENCY / INTERRUPTS):** If the PCH waited to collect 50 keystrokes before bundling them into one big package to send to the CPU, there would be terrible input lag because human interfaces typically needs real-time response, the keyboard is treated as high priority even though the data size is very small. Cycle:
    
    - You press the letter A.
        
    - The keyboard sends a tiny, 1-byte signal (called a scancode) to the I/O Bridge (PCH / Southbridge).
        
    - The I/O immediately fires a hardware interrupt up the system Bus.
        
    - The CPU drops whatever its doing immediately and asks "what do you have for me".
        
    - The I/O bridge grabs the 1 byte, sends to the OS to print to the screen and continues its work.
        
- **The Harddrive Strategy (HIGH THROUGHPUT/DMA):** Contrast to the keyboard with an SSD loading a 2GB 4K video file. If the I/O bridge interrupted the CPU for every single byte of that video file, the CPU would be interrupted 2 billion times. The entire computer would freeze until the movie finished loading. For heavy data devices, the system uses a strategy called Direct Memory Access (DMA). The CPU tells the Disk Controller (the brain of the hard disk) to put the 2GB file onto a RAM address (will technically a continuous block of RAM addresses). The I/O bridge streams the video file from the disk into the RAM and when its done, the CPU is interrupted. So the CPU is only interrupted once.
    

**- THE MAIN MEMORY** The main memory essentially is a storage device that holds both a program and the data it manipulates while the processor is executing the program. Physically, the main memory consists of a collection of Dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips. Logically, memory is organized as a linear array of bytes, each with its own unique memory address much like an array index starting from 0. In general, each of the machine instructions that constitute a program can consist of a variable number of bytes. The sizes of data items that corresponds to C program variables vary according to type. This logical and physical realities are separated by the Memory Controller.

**- THE PROCESSOR:** The Central Processing Unit (CPU) or simply processor, is the engine that interprets (or executes) instructions stored in main memory. At its core is a WORD-SIZE STORAGE DEVICE (OR REGISTER) called THE PROGRAM COUNTER (PC). At any point in time, the PC points at (contains the address of) some machine-language instruction in the main memory. From the time that power is applied to the system until the time that the power is shut off, a processor repeatedly executes the instruction pointed at by the program counter and updates the program counter to point to the next instruction. A processor appears to operate according to a very simple instruction execution model, defined by its instruction set Architecture. The ISA is essentially a contract between the software and CPU, it promises that the CPU execute instructions in strict sequence (instruction 1 will completely finish executing before instruction 2) and executing a single instruction involves performing a series of steps. The processor reads the instruction from memory pointed at by the program counter. FETCH -> DECODE -> EXECUTE -> UPDATE -> NEXT. interprets the bits in the instructions, performs some simple operation dictated by the instruction and then updates the program counter to point to the next instruction, which may or may not be contiguous memory to the instruction that was just executed. There are only a few of these simple operations and they usually only involve the main memory, the register file, and the Arithmetic logic Unit (ALU). The register file is a small storage device that consists of a collection of word-size registers, each with its own unique name. The ALU is the CPU's actual muscle, everything boils down to millions of tiny, simple operations performed by the ALU. The ALU is divided into two distinct physical circuits: THE ARITHMETIC UNIT: It performs fundamental math: Addition and subtraction. THE LOGIC UNIT: This performs advanced boolean operations. Here are examples of simple operations that the CPU might carry out at the request of an instruction:

- LOAD: Copy a byte or a word from Main memory into a register, overwriting the previous contents of the register.
    
- STORE: Copy a byte or a word from a register to a location in main memory, overwriting the previous contents of that location.
    
- OPERATE: Copy the contents of two registers to the ALU, perform an arithmetic operation on the two words, and store the result in a register, overwriting the previous contents of that register.
    
- JUMP: Extract a word from the instruction itself and copy that word into the program counter, overwriting the previous value of the PC. We say that a processor appears to be a simple implementation of its instruction set Architecture, but in fact modern processors use far more complex mechanisms (like pipelining, branching) to speed up program execution. But with this Model, we can describe two things with Abstraction of the other: Processor's Instruction set which describes the effect of each machine-code instruction And the Processor's Microarchitecture which describes how the processor is actually implemented.
    

**CHAPTER 1.4.2: RUNNING THE HELLO PROGRAM** Note that, in this description, a lot of details will be omitted but will be filled later as we progress. Initially, the shell program is executing its instructions, waiting for us to type a command. As we type the characters `./hello` at the keyboard, the shell program reads each one into a register using keyboard interrupts and then stores in memory (travelling through system bus). When we hit the enter key on the keyboard, the shell knows that we have finished typing the command. The shell then loads the executable hello file by executing a sequence of instructions that copies the code and data in the hello executable from disk to main memory (where it can be accessed by the CPU). The data includes the string of characters `hello, world\n` that will eventually be printed out. Using a technique known as Direct Memory Access (DMA), the data travels directly from disk to main memory without passing through the processor. Basically the CPU tells the disk controller to copy this exact thing into main memory, the I/O bridge takes over and also the disk controller, the CPU continues its work and is only interrupted once the loading is finished. Once the code and data in the hello object file are loaded into memory, the processor begins executing the machine-language instructions in the hello program's main routine. These instructions copy the bytes in the `hello, world\n` string from memory to the register file, and from there to the display device, where they are displayed on the screen. -> It passes the string and figures out that we want to load an executable.